yeah I gotta say I'm just stunned but
there's many of you
here because I saw the original schedule
maybe a month ago and I said oh look I'm
after lunch on Friday and up against the
aqua feedback forum it's just going to
be me and a couple of close friends so
this is I'm stunned by this so I'm going
to be talking about large-scale web
optics applications and because the
content of this is a little more
subjective than some of the earlier
sessions I thought it's improve
appropriate for me to let you know who I
am so Steve Meyer consulting engagement
manager from Apple eye services I've
actually done web objects and next Apple
related technologies here for just about
two weeks short of 10 years first six
years is that I was doing what you'd now
call cocoa development two of those as a
consultant another for doing shrink-wrap
and in the last four years I've been
with Apple doing the web objects
development and just recently been
working as the consultant consulting
manager and what that means outside of
the business aspect of writing proposals
and things like that is I'm responsible
for doing architectural reviews design
reviews at the beginning of projects
midway through projects sometimes when
customers have done projects and they
say okay can we have someone from Apple
come in and just make sure we're on the
right track before we go too far so I
think I actually have a fairly good
picture of what everybody has a
background for what they want to do so
introduction why is it important that
you're here ok thing is that even though
we work in a business where we tend to
think of ok everybody's on the web now
it's not even close to true matter of
fact the big money isn't there yet I
mean the government is just starting
this state and local government is just
starting this your conservative
businesses you know caterpillar General
Motors you look at the Dow and they're
the ones who actually have a lot of
money and they're used to spending a lot
of money and I can tell you from the
perspective of somebody who
done the small startup thing that
consulting to those kind of people is a
great way to pay the mortgage while
you're writing the next killer app the
second thing here is that large-scale
projects really are different you can't
just say oh it's twice as hard place as
many people the standard problem there
it has to do with communication but
there's another thing that Ernie kind of
barely touched on which many people
don't realize and this they stick around
for a while and I like to use the
analogy of a hill and if you could go
with the picture that everybody kind of
uses when they want to indicate steep
learning curve so I want to use this in
completely different context you've got
this starts out gentle gets steeper and
steeper and steeper and if you think of
that in terms of the complexity of a
problem what you find is that as
everything in the tool space improves
you're cutting little steps into that
hill and what that means is year by year
by year you're making hard problems
simple you know that top step keep your
icing but there's always a top step it
means that at some point you reach the
top and what you don't realize is that
while we're making the harder and harder
things easier we're making the first
hard thing harder we're losing the
middle ground so what you end up with is
case where as soon as you get past the
the easy stuff you're suddenly in the
complex and you need all of the what
people say baggage but it's not of large
projects so what you're going to learn
here mostly if I do my job is how does
web objects fit in large project you
know what do you want to do special with
with objects when you're in a large
project and of course what I think is
most important what comes out of my
experience of reviewing things is what
not to do how to stay out of trouble so
that is a large project if you have any
of these things you've got a large
project now that's kind of misleading
because most of those things are related
I mean no one
is going to have a large project team
working for a long time producing not
much for a few people so it all does
kind of pile together the one thing
that's on that is not on this list and
which kind of ties the whole thing
together big money when I say a
large-scale project it's not less than a
million dollars okay I just use that as
a number to my own number but so I want
to start out with just give the general
engineering practices if there's anybody
who's run a large project is a project
manager doesn't matter if you've ever
used web objects at all the next ten
minutes or so is going to be either
boring or comforting to you and for all
those people who have never been on part
of a large project this will tell you
what it is that is going to be expected
of you so you always need these
practices and for the most part web
objects doesn't impose anything on it so
first obviously project management and
I'm going to try to go through these
relatively quickly staffing we're not
just talking about the development
staffing here we're not just talking
about database admins or network people
we're talking about configuration
management talking about techie mode
technical documentation all that stuff
what we as developers typically call
overhead which that's wrong
communication
it's another white nice way of hiding a
dirty word developers that means
meetings and I think it means real
meetings in the sense of actually
talking to each other face-to-face video
conferencing can work audio conferencing
doesn't work email you just wishing if
you think that's going to get it done
scheduling not much to say there except
that when you have a large project you
look out and you see you don't really
have to deliver for nine months and it's
very easy to just kind of cruise through
the first six of those so scheduling
really should be you need to task things
basically a week at a time if you if
you're regularity is any courses in that
you're not really scheduling and the
last thing that you can't possibly track
it
okay source code control this is kind of
a religion with anybody who's been on a
large project
you're not serious if you're not
controlling your source and also it's
not just source although this says that
every single document associated with
the project put it under the version
control if nothing else you know you've
got it all in a repository and
somebody's responsible for backing up
the repository you can never lose more
than since the last time you checked in
and in this case I actually have a
recommendation I really like CVS it's
the most common thing for our developers
to use it's used internally by Apple and
the biggest advantage for a large
project is this the optimistic locking
it means that you're not getting each
other's way because let's see show of
hands here who knows what optimistic
locking is okay that's only 25% so I
want to go through good explain that the
idea is that when you have a source code
control system a pessimistic system
basically says that you can check out a
document for viewing but you can't
modify it until you say you know I want
to lock this thing and assume you've
done that no one else can lock it
they've got it and this presentation is
actually good an example what the
problem with that is is that there's
like 45 slides in this and I turned to
the first draft about a week ago and
then I flew back home to Virginia and I
made a bunch of text changes to it the
same time we had a graphics professional
changing about for the graphics here we
came back and since we didn't have any
communication we both changed the thing
so that's no control well let's suppose
we put it under a pessimistic system
what what happened is he would have
noticed that I was away he would have
checked it out I would have been
somewhere else not being able to
communicate with him I would have broken
the lock anyway and I'd be off and
running so in a large that's gone that's
what's going to happen when you have a
whole bunch of people who can't
necessarily communicate all the time
you just get end up breaking pessimistic
locks all the time the optimistic
locking scheme is that everybody's
allowed to check it out it's one
checking in that everybody has to sync
up to make sure that they have the
latest version now great example it
turns out that between myself and a
graphics guy we'd only both touch one
slide so I could have put my stuff in
with just one conflict and then we could
have negotiate over that so that's why
I'm a big fan bug tracking you know all
the software is going to have bugs you
can't track it you can't fix it simple
enough I don't have a specific
recommendation here we use a lot of
different things including some
homegrown things where it says web
access here what I really mean is remote
access because again if you got a large
team sooner or later somebody is going
to need to be able to access that thing
when they're on vacation something like
that the other elements here mostly just
have to do with their what's good in
supporting release management and some
other things are we coming up real soon
you need to have a build test team and
of course whenever you hear that you
think your team the team may actually be
one guy for half time but there ask me
somebody who's designated is you know
this is the person who builds the code
you need to have a fixed internal
release schedule or start build schedule
make a distinction between builds and
releases because builds are really
internal and what you need to have is
somebody who can say you know noon every
Friday it's my job to go put a tag on
the whole CVS repository with the build
name check the whole thing out and build
it the nice thing that does for you is
make sure you always do have something I
can build at a moment's notice in case a
customer suddenly decides that they'd
like to see the latest features even
though you haven't promised them or
release and it also is good because it
keeps the developers knowing that you
know I should be getting stuff done
every week there's things on the
schedule every week and there are build
names every week so if you say I'm going
to fix this bug in build 34 you know
exactly how many
so they build 34 is so it's really good
for that
okay that's pretty much it for general
stuff now let's talk about what it is
that you need to support web objects
itself first documentation now the
project people are going to go well
documentation is some things you need
for everything anyway and the real
reason I put it under the web objects
thing is it web objects does have what I
would call some special needs for
documentation only some of these though
like requirements requirements are
pretty much the same everywhere and that
they're you from your customers what
you're likely to get is relatively vague
high-level descriptions of functionality
okay
specifications is something else
specifications what we want for
specifications is we want to have actual
prototype interfaces of all the screens
and we want a navigation map and we want
functional descriptions and what's
supposed to occur between those now the
customers aren't necessarily going to
give you that and I'll get back to that
in just a bit but that's what we call a
spec it's not enough to just kind of say
oh would we like to be an e-commerce
system the design documentation actor is
kind of interesting because as we
usually do design documentation a lot of
it looks like the specifications one
nice thing you can do is you know for
each of the the design mock-ups you've
got go ahead and associate with that the
you know a screenshot of will builder
for what that component looks like and
then you also you want to have
documentation on a component by
component basis that you know a one
sheet on each component basically says
here's what it is
inputs outputs actions etc the
deployment documentation is for the most
part fairly simple it's if you had to
install the software from scratch
including really you know assume install
the web server install the apps install
the database etc and if the thing
crashes how do you restart it that's
pretty much what it comes down to
documents like this it's really good to
have
pictures and I'll be showing you a
picture a little bit but you know the
kind of picture I'm talking about
the other two things the coding in the
user for the most part those are pretty
standard documentation they're only
included here for completeness so the
hardware architecture you should expect
to be working to case you start out this
is a large project therefore eventually
you're going to have multiple web
servers multiple app servers multiple
data sources that's not the same thing
as necessarily saying multiple databases
or a single database replicate or
whatever that's more detail than I'm
talking about right now but that's what
we're looking at and I've simplified the
picture a little bit you notice that
only webserver one is connected to
anything and only really app server one
is connected further downstream
otherwise lots of lines all over
everywhere up in front there the the DNS
that's that's referring to a DNS
round-robin that basically masks the
fact to the net that you've got multiple
web servers so they both appear to be
the same thing this is the kind of thing
is that you can expect to see something
like this in your system admin slash
deployment documentation so that someone
knows how to hook something up now I'm
actually going to zip by an animation
that wasn't supposed to be in here and
move on to the software architecture
that that hardware architecture locks
you into already and that's that's
actually partly a bad thing importantly
a good thing
first thing you're already dealing you
know that because you have different
Hardware separate Hardware multiple
instances all that you start out
designing for the problems you're going
to have with data caching and
synchronization and I'm guessing that
many of you were here yesterday when Dan
did is presentation on that so you
should know the issues to look out for
also given that once again if you've
separated you know you've got multiple
instances you know you've got data
synchronization issues go ahead and
break out the application into more than
one application
I mean don't dump all the functionality
into one big thing and typically that's
done by you
pick the things that are read-only
because you can deal with their
synchronous synchronization one way you
pick the things that are you know Publix
can see that only maybe employees can
see and then only people were just you
administering the database can see and
when you do that you also get the
benefit that you can then separately
optimize configurations for each of
those one thing that is really quite
helpful for that is if you've got any
particular function usually this is an
admin function where you're expecting
it's going to take a long time it's
going to put a big load on something you
can schedule it so that that app only
runs doing low-level times so you'll
never be hitting your system at the same
time your users are ok so you've got an
architecture let's talk about some
issues in application design I'm not
going to teach you how to design an
application so let's show you what parts
of application designer likely to cause
you problems in a big app ok first
typical code ordination looks like this
I mean and you have a data framework or
more than one framework you've got
multiple sources of different types it's
good to get that off by itself that'll
have your EO model and that'll have your
custom classes you have this fixes
framework which always accumulates and
I'll talk about that a little bit but it
happens and then you'll have your
architectural frameworks your reusable
components for the most part then you'll
have one or more applications as a
result your team looks like that you
have an architecture team you've got a
data modeling team you've got a couple
app teams now it seems like every time I
look at how someone has set up a team
they've piled all the experience people
onto the data modeling and architecture
and there's a real problem with that
well there's two real problems actually
one has to do mmm one of them has to do
with the fact that you're always going
to be running the risk of having your
data modeling and architecture being so
sophisticated that your app teams can't
use it
the other problem with this is that and
this is going to kind of come up severly
you've got a maintainability problem
there because at any particular point if
your senior people who are most likely
to leave so I I always like to have you
make sure that even if we go with team
here and again teams aren't necessarily
very many people when I talked about a
large project way it's beginning what is
the large team a large team is maybe you
know 15 or 20 people but the web objects
part of that we're talking three four
five I mean that's it if you have an app
that takes 15 or 20 web objects
developers I only know one of those in
my personal experience and that was an
effort that was going to replace a
system the federal government currently
spends three hundred million dollars a
year to maintain so if you got one of
those call me anyway
the other thing about this is you have
to make sure that you have planned
communication and I'll get into this
pretty shortly about what it is why the
communication is necessary but the part
that it's plan is what's important
suppose you've got an architecture team
they're building musical components if
you have that once a month you have to
make the architecture team stand up do a
PowerPoint presentation on what they've
done in the last month so the rest of
the team's know what's available you
can't count on them to just you know
send out messages we've got this new
cool reusable component come look at it
doesn't work that way
so plan the communication plan the
meetings ok data modeling we're one of
the data modeling team what the data
modeling teams need to watch out for you
got to make sure that you're modeling
the process not just the static data
where you can look at what the company
does you need to be sure how are the
applications going to use this data and
the biggest thing that happens when you
don't do that
the next thing you over normalize there
what that means is it you can never ever
actually get to a meaningful collection
of data to display to a user without
having to follow a bunch of
relationships or if your data fake
database folks do a bunch of table joins
I got to save like 80% of everything I
see that I look at and I don't like the
data modeling that's it and the nice
thing about it is that there's some
relatively simple fixes and you tend to
get big performance wins when you do it
and people are impressed the bad thing
is that it shouldn't happen in the first
place and this last one being cautious
with the entity inheritance I don't know
why it is that comes out this way but
every time I run into a project where
someone has used yet ID inheritance
there's a problem on the project there's
different problems but it just seems to
be one of those things where you know if
you see that someone's using entity
inheritance ask my and make sure
everyone knows what's happening
abstraction of data interfaces is a
great thing it's a it's a nolo concept
from way back but as you can see I have
a couple things that I don't like about
it and really the biggest one here is
the first one that if you try to
abstract too much away about what your
data sources are you end up losing any
of the advantages that the people who
designed the data sources built into
them a great example is if you you can
put an interface on top of us and if you
forget to put prefetching of
relationships into it you've blown any
chance of optimizing your data access
second thing is kind of similar if
you're if you're trying to abstract
things that just don't go together you
could end up with something that doesn't
really work for either that's actually a
general case or the first one and the
last is you kind of whenever you get
into the
of I'm going to take something and build
a system that'll work with anything you
always base it on what you know and when
you come up with something that doesn't
match what you abstracted to there's a
really good chance instead of changing
your abstraction you're just going to
hacking some code to make it work with
just that one source and I'm you
defeated the entire purpose of doing
extraction another thing it's great
design for reuse
although see that never really happens
in the real world
either what you have is designed for use
redesign for reuse or design for use
recognize you can reuse so you know you
can tend to want to kind of make a
second sweep through the whole app once
you've got it done and figure out which
bits you want to use next time but for a
lot of people who have done even small
apps before they have with them candy
collection these are things that I had
been useful before so they're actually
or no it's not like you're always
starting from scratch with reusable
components the best thing for when it
comes to reuse with web objects is the
small reusable components small elements
and if you want to know a good way to
design them don't look at what low
extension says as a framework the other
thing that clearly from a you reuse
standpoint is your data framework your
enterprise objects if you model
basically if you model the thing
properly you can carry it around
although you may need to modify it for
the individual needs of applications and
I'll talk about that too and lastly when
you do this organize them in the things
that don't have dependencies on one
another it's a real shame when you find
that there's a you know a really cool
table implementation but it requires
that you link in a framework that has
somebody's own idea of what a set should
be I found that a lot of times it's not
only frustrating for the people who are
trying to use it but there's almost you
guarantee at some point someone's going
to forget to drag along that utility is
framework and it's just not going to
work I got asked about this a lot
from a design standpoint people want to
go things be fast they hear who
multi-threading let's do it and you know
multi-threading is hard it's really hard
there's a few cases where you really
want to use it it's mostly in terms of
somebody something that's listening and
gets a request and spits requests off to
somebody else to process and then starts
listening again now you can think of you
know the whoa adapter is doing that but
you don't really want to because your
application is doing that it's actually
doing processing and I said it's really
hard to write it's really hard to debug
notice I didn't even put tests in the
middle there because the assumption is
you're going to have to debug it you're
not going to get it right and the cool
thing about this is that multi-threaded
things fail under load and they come
under load when you load test them and
that's at the end of your development
cycle so you're pretty much when you go
down this road you're pretty much
guaranteeing what you're going to get is
a hard to track down bug just as you
want to go to production even if it's a
simple solution that's quite a lot of
stress the benefit benefits of
multi-threading tough to really be sure
as you're designing you're going to get
a chance to use them because unless you
have the source to everything down the
line that you're dealing with you can't
be sure that somebody is in defeating
the whole purpose you know whether it's
occurring somewhere in the enterprise
object framework in the adapter for a
particular kind of database in the
client libraries for that database in
the connections to the server there's
just too many places where you could
spend a lot of time and find out that
someone's just serializing it anyway
however you have to do it web objects
does support it I mean by default
resources are requested and dealt with
you know images that sort of thing in
multiple threads and you can turn on the
request handling and have a ball but I
warned you so I'll really say there I go
to I have analogy here that I like to
use when someone says I'd like to go to
multi-threading for
performance and that is that thing at a
grocery store you've got a couple to
checkout lines bunch of people piling up
behind it and what do they do when that
happens
they open up another checkout stand
and people go move over to that and
you're good to us that's starting up
other instance now if they manage to
actually fill up the whole store all the
time they open another store mile down
the road so that we're talking about
bringing up and up another app server
what you never ever had anybody do is go
to the checkout clerks and say why don't
you process some of the customers in
parallel that's really kind of kind of
the end of my feeling on multi-threading
now when you're designing things you
know that there are some warning signs
and this is actually a warning is a
strong word but I couldn't come up with
one I really wanted this is when I go
out and I review something I see one of
these things happening I have three
questions do you need to be doing this
to get the functionality you want is
there any other way to do this and right
now do you have it documented to the
point where I could have walked in not
talked to you and found out the answers
the questions I disaster and if the
answer is yes to all these things I'm
pretty happy but if the answer is no to
any of these things then you know
there's work to be done first of them
kind of go together
you subclassing a lot of Apple classes
you're kind of intertwined with apples
classes you know this is when you go to
training this is what they show you this
is the ideal you've got bottom four
things are all ours top things yours and
of course that top thing maybe multiple
frameworks but it's all up there you're
not really getting in the way of the web
objects or the gyro control or any of
that that's what I see a lot just room
for me now I got to say that this is the
kind of thing that the objective-c
developers are much more likely to be
able to get away with
the thing is the objective-c gives you a
much bigger gun to shoot yourself in the
foot with but that's not saying I don't
like at the language I like it but this
kind of structure is something that's
really common when you've found
something this kind of accumulated bits
of objective-c and another problem here
is those little thin blue lines chances
are they get dependencies between them
and that does that violates one of those
rules for usability I pour it out that
you can't even if you decide you really
like that one you know second blue line
there it's got some functionality you
need you may have to carry along the
rest of it and that's bad more warning
signs you got large application in
session classes now this is partly a
design issue and partly a coding issue
every once in a while you'll want to
sweep through the application and
section classes and see what cross
they've accumulated is people just put
things in because they're it's a big
global variable basically you can stuff
anything you want in there but even from
a design standpoint application and
section classes aren't necessarily
supposed to be all that heavy you're
using objective-c in a Java project this
is where I said I I like objective-c I
like Java I'm not going to get into the
religion nor wars over that but if
you've chosen Java and I see Objective C
anywhere in your project I know you've
drawn with those blue lines
similarly the next two actually are not
all that bad I mean you're working with
EEO access framework there's lots of
benign reasons to be down at that level
probably more than anything else here
but still it's at that point you're down
below the object level and all I really
want to do is make sure you know justify
your use the last one is new one I only
really found out about this in the last
two months or so and I think it may be
the result of frustrated objective-c
programmers this is an option they have
to do some very strange things while
sticking with Java and that's when you
have custom key Val code that means that
you're doing things with the bindings or
you're doing things with the value for
key you and your enterprise objects a
it's a relatively benign instance of
this is if you're changing your
enterprise objects so that they can tell
based on a key value whether or not
you're asking for a let's say address
from this particular page or that
particular page you know if you just say
put an asterisk on the end of the key
and you've got something that can parse
that out that that's relatively benign
mostly it's a convenience it keeps you
from having to put methods inside each
of those components to go and get the
value from the enterprise object and
manipulate it as that page once it it's
you know I'm against it
but I'm not going to push it real hard
the thing is this opens up it actually
does and I kind of hate to say this
because I'm telling you you know don't
build the bomb this way is you can put
anything in bindings and if you're
overriding your they take value for
binding you can do anything with it you
can very easily just put a binding in it
and says you know as long as the the
binding starts with you know three
exclamation points
that means that the value that comes in
is a block of Perl code and I want you
to send that out to the Perl interpreter
and take that value and that actually
I've seen one
not with pearls or something else and
that's exactly what I mean by oh my god
so that sort of thing is really hard to
document too because wad files are not
where you're looking for code and for as
we as we move more and more into the
abroad developer community more people
are gonna be looking at this stuff in
web objects builder and it's really hard
to tell just as you're zipping down
through the bindings you know this has
an asterisk on the end that means if
it's a number coming in we're going to
divide it by two before we use it so no
I don't like that a lot I think that
there's that there's a there's a real
possibility for abuse right now on that
so let's assume you've managed to get
through design without any major efforts
you're on the prototyping and you got to
divide the prototyping into things this
is this is a customer issue the user
interface prototyping now if you
remember way back at the bidding I told
you what a spec is and user interface
prototyping is writing the spec and you
have to have the customer know that make
them understand until you've locked down
like 90 percent of the user interface to
a level detail that you've got
screenshots they haven't yet specified
the app and all the work that you're
doing up to that point may not be final
the technical thing you know that's
where you're trying to decide whether or
not you can actually hit that airline
reservation system whether you can
integrate the credit card processing
with the Oracle database that sort of
thing and you'll want to make the
interface for that as ugly as you can
you don't want to confuse the customer
into thinking there's any possibility
that the code rewriting now is anything
but demonstrating that you can go do it
I like to say when you're doing the
demos you want to demo the user
interface on a Mac demo the technical
stuff on a PC
and if you do that this throw it away
thing works on its own wind a
construction here I'm mostly talking to
the developer assume the projects and
then continue after you're gone this is
a long project you know it's got to be
at least six months and you got to be
responsible and I have some some things
to say about responsibility in a bit
overall though the construction of a web
objects application is no different than
the rest of development it's not much I
can say about web objects technology
specific things as you're writing the
code two things though they're really
helpful and unfortunate I don't see
enough of standardized society of
standardizing keywords in your comments
and I'll have an example on this it's
really helpful to come up with a list of
keywords that someone can search through
the code for and that list of keywords
ought to be put in your repository can
hear that again document document
document okay how about that anybody
seen that kind of comment before
interesting thing about that the first
the first things that's actually two
comments
I mean separated by an indefinite amount
of time and the first the first comment
there I sort of made up although I've
got I've seen something close to it the
frightening thing the second comment I
lifted verbatim from an app that's in
production all I did was change the
three initials there at the end of my
own which may not have been all that
necessary because when I asked around
nobody could tell me who that was that's
what I want to see and you don't have to
add line every line like that but when
you're doing something like you know
clearly like that that first thing there
it's a line of nothing but but key words
it's great to have you know fix me as a
really common one I think we all use
that occasionally but if your standard I
say yes indeed this is you know what
we're going to use when we've got
something that needs to be looked at if
you can put keywords for the
dependencies of every version of things
that you need to work with that's really
helpful you notice you've got enough
text there that no one's likely to go
around and put a hmm line after it and I
put my full name on a date so at least
you know people may not remember who I
am
even with a full name but there's a date
there so they have some clue as to when
it was an issue and the other nice thing
actually about doing the whole the
keywords for versions of stuff this is a
three five problem in theory in practice
I completely made this up what you need
to do is every time you upgrade before
somebody searches through for all the
three five keywords verifies whether or
not these comments are right and changes
the three five to four which means
you've never got any issues that are
more than one version old of any of your
products and you really like that trust
me more construction things at this
point the developers stopped wanting to
go to meetings really the meetings have
a purpose it's up to your management
from a development standpoint it's up to
whoever it is your interface to the rest
of the team to make sure that you not go
into the meetings you know
- go - and one thing is that I I hear it
once in a while and people try to
convince me this is a bad thing 12 of us
trooped into a room five minutes later
we we walked out again what a waste of
time like no that's perfect it took you
an hour that's that but to walk into a
room walk out in five minutes that means
the system is working means everybody
showed up like they were supposed to
there's no opening questions from people
who didn't show up and everything's on
track if you were to take a look at it
you'd find you take more time trying to
coordinate among those 12 people whether
or not they needed to have a meeting
then they just have them all show up and
this last item clever is bad you know I
tried to I thought about making this
less bold and I talked to other people
in my team about this concept and you
know excited I thought that you know
maybe it's just me and after talking to
them I decided it deserves its own slide
okay clever is that and keep in mind
this is clever in terms of coding this
is not intelligent design this is clever
coding and I have an example for you I
think probably the cleverest I've ever
been which is to say the grossest
violation of this principles go back to
1992 I think it was I was doing what was
what's now cocoa development and I
really wanted to print panel to work
differently so I went into the debugger
I disassembled the appropriate part of
the print panel code I examine that and
figured out the memory locations of the
private instance variables of it and a
little pointer arithmetic and little
guessing I managed to get it so when I
wanted to I could stuff data into those
places in memory that the print panel
would go look to see what its state was
and I could change it and it worked you
know
this was code that you know I in theory
owned I was going to maintain nobody
who's paying me to do this
it was my this isn't something I was
leaving behind for somebody at my
expense although I'm standing here and
I've got an Apple badge on when I have a
badge means I'm not maintaining it I
think I know who originally did have to
maintain that and I liked him so even
though there's maybe 20 lines of code
and I had a page and a half a
documentation on that whole thing when I
look back on it I was much prouder of
that achievement then that I am now and
although it's hard for you to think
forward and imagine how will I get a
feel about that 10 years from now it's a
pretty good guideline so how would you
feel of a friend had to maintain this
now the three items there I mean why is
it bad outside of my story basically I
had a an even bolder version of this
slide and I decided to tone it down
because probably without my words it
would seem a little too harsh but first
you can fool yourself and by that I mean
a couple of things but you can have a
problem with you may not actually
understand everything you're doing you
know I think the print panel worked it
worked in all the cases I tested but I
mean kind of wandering through the
assembly code is not necessarily the
best way to be sure if I had to go back
to that now I mean admittedly that's
eight years ago but if I had go back to
maybe even six months later I may not
know any idea what it was I was doing
and that kind of follows on you can fold
your team two different ways you can
fool them in coming up with something
it's so clever they have no idea how to
use it or you can fool them because six
months later you're gone you know you're
the new CTO it show me the money Tom and
they have to try to maintain it unless
this is something that people don't
think of you can fool us
and by this this I mean the engineering
team at Apple because everybody knows
you know there's a gap there's no
guarantee
if you use private API and of course the
print panel thing you know I knew there
was no guarantee but what you don't
really get is that there's not really a
guarantee if you use public API in a way
that nobody ever thought you could if
you're depending upon your liked it
order in which certain things happen to
get called so you can know stuff things
into a request here and pick up the fact
that those values are in the response
over there you run a risk and the the
scariest thing that you can hear from a
project management standpoint when
someone's showing off something cool is
ooh I bet Apple didn't know you could do
that okay so you got the app built maybe
testing you need to have a real separate
environment to this you need to get your
customers to duplicate the production as
much as you possibly can testing Web
Apps is a boring thing to do use
automated tools for both the regression
testing and for load testing although
it's occasionally it's kind of neat to
just get the whole accounting department
to go at four o'clock come and get the
app gotta give them a break in their day
you use the humans for functional
testing but the other thing you want to
do is you want to have the occasional if
you win stopping in doing your load
testing because you're going to gather
stats both from the inside of the app in
terms of you know the low stats things
and from the outside in terms of what
the overall you know what a browser
would see in terms of response time what
you don't get is the human I thought
this page would go quicker so while
you're doing the load testing just have
have a human sitting by doing some stuff
and letting you know how they feel about
it and we're back to meeting schedule
the regular bug tracking meetings and
make people will show up because once
again the developers are very busy
trying to do things other than fix bugs
that someone mentioned the week ago so
make sure that the right people attend
each of those meetings not everybody but
that you have them to really buy time
you're down to the testing phase
it's got to be daily performance now it
works
how fast can it go I'm cheating here
there were like three different sessions
you should have gone to if you wanted to
know about performance these are the
questions everybody asks though and the
real point of this actually is not so
much what theory is to say here is where
I'm saying it if you haven't gone gotten
to this far you can't answer those
questions and too often I run in the
case when I'm doing proposal type things
that someone's going to say well I
realize I haven't told you what the app
does yet but how many boxes do I need so
you can't do it I mean I have tried to
come up with heuristics for this sort of
thing to just say well if you happen to
have you know a gigahertz Pentium
machine running as your app server then
assume that it you can support you know
four transactions a second as long as no
response is longer than X doesn't work
you really do need that because you're
either CPU bound or you're going to be
memory bound on these things and you
don't know which until you know how much
memory it takes so never answer these
questions till after you started testing
that given assuming it's slow what do
you want to do about it
first bold item there I think if some
people are going to say it well that's
obvious but it isn't because it's not
just what's most commonly slow its
what's really slow that kills you from a
user perspective let's say you have a
whole bunch of pages that come back in
two seconds and one page comes back in
10 now that thing shows up 10% of the
time you can do the math you end up with
a number that's you know three seconds
or so for your response time within the
app that's not what the user sees at all
and for that I'm going to go back to the
whole grocery store thing which is you
know you've got your 15 items or less
and you're standing behind somebody with
100 items
and behind you is a bunch of people who
also have to three items now from the
checkout clerks perspective one person
took a lot of time other people just
zipped right through your back they're
human so the approach that grocery
stores take if they have 15 items or
less and I actually kind of advocate the
other side of this which is you should
have lines for people with lots and lots
of things and make them stand behind
each other and it sounds like a joke but
it actually it goes back to this as well
I mean as app design it's a good thing
sometimes to recognize when an operation
is going to be expensive and shunt it
off to the app served is handling the
expensive operations and this is where
the human factor comes in is people
usually recognize that you know this is
going to take a long time I want to find
every hotel in Orlando
that's great however for the people who
think they're doing something that's
really short and they end up behind
somebody who's looking for every hotel
in Orlando they're upset so 90% of the
time when you're looking to improve the
performance it's data access so you may
look at modifying the data model or you
may look at customizing versions of the
data model for each of your apps because
the readwrite app may have a different
need then the read-only a lot of people
don't think in terms of that because
you've got your data framework well you
don't have to have just one data
framework you can have them optimized
for the uses that they're going to have
so think about that now lastly you're
manually affection the data you need is
something we almost always resort to in
one case or another
and when I say manually and it's not all
that manual we're really saying here is
rather than configure a well display
group with a data source to go and get
data go ahead and create effects pack
yourself
fetch objects with it and pass the array
over to the display group and what that
can do is you can then set things like
the prefetching at a much finer
granularity for what's being used at the
time
a little bit more on that data access
this is something I see a little bit too
much of don't have complicated bindings
that just keep dotting along because in
the middle there you're not really sure
from a coding perspective how do you get
from manager to spouse up to car that
isn't even necessarily all in one data
source to find out what the spouses car
is made you may have to go up to some
you know mainframe system it's much
better in this case to go ahead figure
out the relationships that you need
fetch the data for that and just let you
know if you put that thing inside a
repetition you'd be here forever so
anticipates the needs of your interface
elements and try to provide them with
their data ahead of time so that they
don't have to do it themselves they're
not smart about data access that way and
the last thing here you'd think you'd
never have this but you do is that
customers will ask for I'd like the
whole database please and sure they
understand that the fetch takes forever
and it's making the app go slow but they
don't realize that they're then
transmitted transferring like ten
megabytes of data to their browser and
they wonder why their network is slow
why is my email not getting it every
time someone tries to run the app so
limit this stuff I mean at the very
least go ahead and you put put it in the
display groups turn on the batching and
if nothing else that's going to show
them when they see because they've got a
zillion pages of batches what a silly
idea is to try to fetch all this data at
once okay you've gotten to the point you
need a deployment team same thing not
necessarily a whole big team to be a
small team it could be a guy cool thing
about this is if you go back to what I
was saying about the builds about the
releases about the testing you've got an
environment that's just like it that
you're going to go to production on and
your deployment team gets to practice
every single time you put out a test
build so they really know what they're
doing but that time there shouldn't be
any last-minute do we know Solaris
kind of question and gather as many
stats as you can while you you actually
got this thing running but you don't
want to impact performance I don't want
to see a bunch of things log it out to
the screen to let you know what's going
on I'm mostly here talking about you
obviously get the wou statistics but
also what you want to do is check the
CPU loads on all the machines web server
app server data servers etc check the
memory on all these things I mean it
doesn't cost that much just go ahead and
check these the check point these things
once an hour forever
because if you ever need to know what
happened you've got knowledge and
knowledge is power last thing there the
application is not finished when you
deploy that's a function of the kind of
customers we're talking about here and
the time that kind of apps we're talking
about you can expect a feature is going
to not make it into version one it's the
only way it's not going to be later than
it is anyway therefore there's always a
version 1.1 and for a management
perspective that means you need to be
thinking about who your maintenance team
is ahead of time and you need to figure
out not just your developers your
maintenance team needs some of the same
overhead as the rest some some of this
stuff can be shared some of it can I
kind of just this is a sad things that
the management types like probably good
things the development types I didn't
put this on the slide here the biggest
issue that I run into with deploying
a big app nutrition this is the point
whatever and leave and really when
you're using something like you know web
objects you've got it you know it's
smart people and a high demand
technology at any moment you have to be
prepared to have somebody walk in and
say you know I'm gone in two weeks that
when you deploy you know there's a real
good chance you to lose like 40 percent
of your folks in the next month because
there are a lot of people who want to
see that make it and then that's when
they'll move on and if you're not
prepared for that it's devastating
hey what went wrong this is this is
actually not even my slide essentially
this is this is a unknown thing within
software development is if you never
managed to get it done at all it's
management's fault no doubt about it
no matter how bad your engineering might
be its management's fault they planned
poorly they didn't follow their plan
they picked the wrong people they use
Windows whatever and and the second half
of that really is if you're stuck at
version one then your engineers did a
lousy job unsaid here but I think we all
understand is it when they're not within
earshot it's the customers fault really
but I'd like to switch that around
because despite all the things that are
in the way actually most of these apps
actually do field then they're
successful so let's look at what went
right who gets the credit and I got to
say I don't care how good your
engineering is if you actually deploy a
version one management gets the credit
and when I say that I don't mean the
deploying version one means you've got
all the features in or even that you've
got it all in on time it means that
things went wrong and the customer
didn't fire you and the team didn't quit
and you got there
the second thing there is no credit the
engineering when the customer comes back
and says I know I only wanted one
language before now it needs four
languages I know I was going to use this
service to validate credit cards and it
will have a response time of maybe five
seconds with 100% reliability but I can
get a lot cheaper thing from somebody
will respond in two seconds with 75%
reliability and that's actually an
example from my own experience if you
get that far no great at that point you
want to congratulate the engineering
folks you don't want to congratulate
them too early though that's that's when
they leave
and to be honest to be fair would it be
fair also not on this bullet item is if
it works particularly if they happen to
be an earshot credit the customer never
hurts and it's actually true a lot of
times when I talk to engineering teams
about their experiences you know how's
it going I hear my customer doesn't
understand the problem my customer can't
make a decision and the ever-popular
my customer is stupid and see it's not
true the customer is not stupid the
customer has different priorities than
you and doesn't necessarily have all the
information to make a decision so if I
can apologize to folks who maybe missed
lunch and are thinking the candy is is
really a good idea right now I'd like to
go back to the grocery store just one
more time as an analogy I mean if you've
got an allergy you got a metaphor
pounding in the ground follow your
customer at some time to the grocery
store and think in terms of you know
they're heading down the cereal aisle
and they stopped by the frosted flakes
and if you're going to have a
metropolitan area chances are they've
got choices there they're going to have
the Kellogg's Frosted Flakes you know
the national brand we're going to have
at least you know maybe a regional brand
but certainly a store brand of it and
you know they may pick up the boxes
they'll look at the nutritional
information something like that but you
know they'll put them down and then what
they've got a choice to face you know
okay the national brand comes with
Quicktime
which is school
the local brand cheaper and what happens
sometime within like 10 seconds to pick
up a box put it in the basket they move
on nobody ever complains that the local
brand doesn't have Quicktime nobody ever
complains the frosted flakes are too
expensive compared to the local brand so
when you are doing those kinds of things
with your customer when you're trying to
tell them
bad news schedule slippage whatever what
you need to do is very simple you lay
out the options for them give them the
consequences of each of the options they
have you make it very clear we can do
this your way but there's a good chance
if we lose this guy over here six months
from now we'll have to pull that feature
because we can't maintain it give the
customer that kind of information the
customer will make a decision once
they've made the decision document the
decision put it in your repository so in
summary big projects are hard they are
but that's all big projects that's not
just web objects projects basically if
you've got anybody who's ever done a
hard project in any other technology
they can manage a big project in web
objects and web objects helps because
you know we're always cutting steps so
the one what is a hard project now and
is a big project requires a big team
this year may not next year and the last
thing is I'm not it's not really
everybody is suited for the big projects
I mean some people just they want to be
too creative they don't like the
structure and that's fine there's lots
of places for that but you know if you
can stick it out in there it's there's
really an immense sense of pride in
having done something like that it's
very much like building the tall
building and what you'll find is that no
matter how many little projects you
might do it's always the big projects
that you remember and incidentally it's
always the big projects you put on your
resume
so because we are so close to the end of
this there's like nothing else you can
go to if you haven't learned by now all
you've really got is the feedback for
them to complain about the last 17
sessions most of these for more
information you must have seen before
and the web objects lab is closed so
sorry about that you must have seen
these names by now
Tony on earth if you got any questions
about all the stuff even you know
something that's specifically for me go
ahead and send it to Ernie Ernie will
route it to me and now we're on to Q&A
[Applause]